# Lollipops
About an ontology combining biology, engineering and evolution
Biology is gradually yielding lessons and ideas for technology, but the resulting innovation is adventitious. Biology is also very complex: currently with no underlying analytical model and so cannot adequately be interrogated by technologists. A concept which can bridge this gap is the trade-off, which leads to speciation in biology and aspects of design and problem-solving in engineering. An ontology is presented which uses biological organisms as case studies and TRIZ-like terms to define trade-offs and the factors by which they can be manipulated. 
In more detail, the OWL ontology is based on a collection of case studies of 'solved' biological trade-offs. I have used the BFO as the basis in the hope that the ontology can be developed / corrected / refined to the standard that it can be made acceptable for inclusion in the OBOFoundry list. An ontology which is as broad and (I have discovered!) ambitious as this one will benefit greatly from incorporation of other ontologies of biology, technology and evolution.
The biology is represented by a range of objects, not particularly well-organised but, most important, relevant to the specific cases used. I suspect that the lists of organs and tissues could be better presented, but see no real reason for doing so without introducing unnecessary complexity. The TRIZ-like terms are taken from the problem-solving set of tools derived from Genrich Altshuller's project. Specifically he introduced a 'matrix' where the problems are described and defined as trade-offs (originally conceived as a sort of Hegalian dialectic) by a group of "Technical Parameters". These Parameters were derived to cover all (!) problems which might be met in design. I have classified them as specific dependant continuants, although the characteristics covered are much wider than this assignment might suggest. Is this wise?  Having defined a trade-off in this way, the solutions to the trade-off, derived from the case studies, are taken from the list in "inventive Principles" which I have included under the class 'process', since they suggest changes. In making this ontology friendly to biology, both Parameters and Principles have definitions and changes recommended which can be performed by biological entities, listed in the class object. Finally, a series of trade-offs has been proposed, defined by a range of relevant Parameters. As an example the biological trade-off “speed-accuracy”, yields factors for a biomimetic version of the trade-off. These are Feedback (e.g. error-correction), Dynamic Response (e.g. control of thresholds), Adaptation (e.g. ability to predict) and Consolidation (e.g. stochastic accumulation). Multi-criteria analysis will allow more versatile numerical models to be developed.

The ultimate aim is to provide a problem-solving tool which can be used in real-time by agents. If it can also provide a new way of describing and categorising biological evolution (a distinct possibility), so much the better.
